[ROMANS 10]

I. ISRAEL'S REFUSAL OF GOD'S RIGHTEOUSNESS (1-15)

   A. PAUL'S EXPRESSION OF CONCERN FOR ISRAEL (1-4)
      1. That Israel be saved, for they have zeal but not knowledge
         (1-2)

	Paul's heart longed for their salvation --> concrete action was prayer
	
	"Stumbled at the stumbling stone" (Romans 9:32) (an obstacle to progress; an impediment to belief or 		understanding : perplexity.)

	Zeal for God, but not according to knowledge = perfect description of Paul himself before his 			conversion. Saul of Tarsus was a notorious persecutor of Christians before Jesus confronted him on the 		road to Damascus
	
	
      2. Through ignorance, they seek to save themselves by the Law,
         and do not submit to God's righteousness in Christ which 
         brings an end to the Law (3-4)

	"by the deeds of the law no flesh will be justified." (Romans 3:20)
	
	People cannot come to Jesus without the right information about the gospel but information alone is not 	enough to save anyone. There must be a radical submission to the righteousness of God, putting away our 	own righteousness. PERSONAL RESPONSIBILITY

	Jesus is the end of the law for those believe. The law ends for the believer in the sense that our 	obedience to the law is no longer the basis for our relationship with God. The law has not come to an end in the sense of no longer reflecting God's standard or no longer showing us our need for a Savior.


	
   B. RIGHTEOUSNESS OF THE LAW vs. RIGHTEOUSNESS BY FAITH IN CHRIST
      (5-15)

      1. Righteousness of the Law as defined by Moses (5)

	We must follow the law perfectly -- but we cannot. So why follow it? => BECAUSE the law is perfect and 		holy, and as discussed, it makes our sins known to us. Jesus came not to delete the law, but to be a 	perfect example of it -- to show how the people have twisted and turned the law (THE SHADOW OF CHRIST)

      2. Righteousness by faith as defined by Paul (6-15)
         a. Involves the mouth and the heart (6-8)

	"Unbelief really puts a sad slur upon Christ. She talks about going up to heaven: but suppose it were 		needed that somebody should ascend to heaven, that would imply that Jesus had never come down from 		thence to reveal the Father. She talks of descending into the abyss, as if Christ had never come up 		from the dead. The fact is, all that can be done has been done. Why do you want to do what is already 		done? All that can be felt has been felt; why do you want to feel it? 'It is finished,' said Christ, 		why do you strive to do it over again?" (Spurgeon)

	it is not complicated. by believing (heart) and speaking (mouth) of your faith, you are saved.

	b. Involves confessing Jesus and believing in His resurrection
            (9-10)
	
	Confession has the idea of agreeing with. When we confess the LORD Jesus, we agree with what God said 		about Jesus, and with what Jesus said about Himself. It means we recognize that Jesus is God, that He 		is the Messiah, and that His work on the cross is the only way of salvation for mankind.

	belief + confession = righteousness & salvation

	The word Kurios was and is the touchstone of faith = LORD

         c. Offered to all who believe and call on Him (11-13)

	"We believe everything which the Lord Jesus has taught, but we must go a step further, and trust him. 		It is not even enough to believe in him, as being the Son of God, and the anointed of the Lord; but we 		must believe on him … The faith that saves is not believing certain truths, nor even believing that 		Jesus is a Savior; but it is resting on him, depending on him, lying with all your weight on Christ as 		the foundation of your hope. Believe that he can save you; believe that he will save you; at any rate 		leave the whole matter of your salvation with him in unquestioning confidence. Depend upon him without 		fear as to your present and eternal salvation. This is the faith which saves the soul." (Spurgeon)

	romans 9: salvation by god + romans 10: salvation by man's "effort" =  how we receive salvation


         d. Accomplished through the medium of preaching (14-15)

	those who preach the gospel of peace have beautiful feet - they partner with God for the salvation of 		men. The feet speak of activity, motion, and progress, and those who are active and moving in the work 		of preaching the gospel have beautiful feet!

II. ISRAEL'S NEGLECT OF THE GOSPEL (16-21)

   A. NOT ALL OBEYED THE GOSPEL (16-18)
      1. As Isaiah predicted (16)
      2. Even though they had ample opportunity (17-18)

	Psalm 19:4 => Jews in Medditeranean area + areas of the Roman empire

   B. THEIR NEGLECT, AND THE GENTILES RECEPTION, FORESEEN BY 
      SCRIPTURES (19-21)
      1. As spoken by Moses (19)

 	Deuteronomy 32:21 => foolish nation used to make israel jealous

      2. As spoken by Isaiah (20-21)

	

LAST LESSONS:

the importance of combining zeal with knowledge

understand that Israel had plenty of opportunity to heed the gospel of Christ, but for the most part they had rejected it

we are blessed to be messengers of God bcos we bring people closer to salvation (the perfect laborer)




[ROMANS 11]

I. GOD HAS NOT TOTALLY REJECTED ISRAEL (1-10)

   A. EVIDENCE SUPPORTING THIS (1-6)
      1. Paul himself (1)
      2. There is a remnant, just as in the days of Elijah (2-5a)
      3. A remnant according to grace, not works (5b-6)

   B. BUT MANY HAVE BEEN HARDENED (7-10)
      1. An "elect" have been saved, the rest were hardened (7)
      2. This "hardening" foretold by Scriptures (8-10)
	
	the Jews being too secure in their own heritage was their undoing

II. HARDENING OF ISRAEL TO BENEFIT ISRAEL (11-32)

   A. THE JEWISH STUMBLING AND GENTILE CONNECTION (11-16)
      1. Salvation to the Gentiles an incentive for the Jews to repent (11-12)

	Israel had stumbled, but they would not fall - in the sense of being removed from God's purpose and 	plan. You can recover from a stumble, but if you fall you're down.

      2. This is one reason why Paul magnified his ministry to the
         Gentiles (13-16)

	the rejection of the gospel by the Jews was riches for the Gentiles.


   B. WORDS OF WARNING AGAINST GENTILE CONCEIT (17-24)
      1. Gentiles are but "wild branches" grafted in to the root 
         (17-18)
      2. To replace "broken branches", true, but can just as easily be
         displaced and replaced (19-24)

	Paul stresses the need to continue in His goodness; not in the sense of a salvation by works, but 	continuing in God's grace and goodness to us - a relationship of continual abiding / pereserverance / 	STEADFASTNESS (product of salvation & faith, not a means).

   C. THE HARDENING AND BLESSING OF ISRAEL (25-32)
      1. Hardening is partial, until the fullness of the Gentiles come 
         in (25)
      2. In this way all Israel will be saved (26-27)
      3. They may be enemies of the gospel, but they are beloved by God
         (28)
      4. And they may obtain mercy just as the Gentiles did (29-32)

33-36

Of Him and through Him and to Him are all things: "All these words are monosyllables. A child just learning to read could easily spell them out. But who shall exhaust their meaning?" (Meyer)

i. It is all of Him: This plan came from God. It wasn't man's idea. We didn't say, "I've offended God and have to find a way back to Him. Let's work on a plan to come back to God." In our spiritual indifference and death we didn't care about a plan, and even if we did care we aren't smart enough or wise enough to make one. It is all of Him.

ii. It is all through Him: Even if we had the plan, we couldn't make it happen. We couldn't free ourselves from this prison of sin and self. It could only happen through Him, and the great work of Jesus on our behalf is the through Him that brings salvation.

iii. It is all to Him: It's not for me, it's not for you, it's all to Him. It is to the praise of the glory of His grace (Ephesians 1:6). It's for His pleasure that we are created, and we find our fulfillment in bringing Him glory and honor.

LAST LESSONS:

understand how God has not totally rejected His people of Israel

see the possibility of apostasy for us today






